docs/gateway/remote.md, before:

---
summary: "Remote access using SSH tunnels (Gateway WS) and tailnets"
read_when:
  - Running or troubleshooting remote gateway setups
title: "Remote Access"
---

# Remote access (SSH, tunnels, and tailnets)

This repo supports “remote over SSH” by keeping a single Gateway (the master) running on a dedicated host (desktop/server) and connecting clients to it.

- For **operators (you / the macOS app)**: SSH tunneling is the universal fallback.
- For **nodes (iOS/Android and future devices)**: connect to the Gateway **WebSocket** (LAN/tailnet or SSH tunnel as needed).

## The core idea

- The Gateway WebSocket binds to **loopback** on your configured port (defaults to 18789).
- For remote use, you forward that loopback port over SSH (or use a tailnet/VPN and tunnel less).

## Common VPN/tailnet setups (where the agent lives)

Think of the **Gateway host** as “where the agent lives.” It owns sessions, auth profiles, channels, and state.
Your laptop/desktop (and nodes) connect to that host.

### 1) Always-on Gateway in your tailnet (VPS or home server)

Run the Gateway on a persistent host and reach it via **Tailscale** or SSH.

- **Best UX:** keep `gateway.bind: "loopback"` and use **Tailscale Serve** for the Control UI.
- **Fallback:** keep loopback + SSH tunnel from any machine that needs access.
- **Examples:** [exe.dev](/platforms/exe-dev) (easy VM) or [Hetzner](/platforms/hetzner) (production VPS).

This is ideal when your laptop sleeps often but you want the agent always-on.

### 2) Home desktop runs the Gateway, laptop is remote control

The laptop does **not** run the agent. It connects remotely:

- Use the macOS app’s **Remote over SSH** mode (Settings → General → “OpenClaw runs”).
- The app opens and manages the tunnel, so WebChat + health checks “just work.”

Runbook: [macOS remote access](/platforms/mac/remote).

### 3) Laptop runs the Gateway, remote access from other machines

Keep the Gateway local but expose it safely:

- SSH tunnel to the laptop from other machines, or
- Tailscale Serve the Control UI and keep the Gateway loopback-only.

Guide: [Tailscale](/gateway/tailscale) and [Web overview](/web).

## Command flow (what runs where)

One gateway service owns state + channels. Nodes are peripherals.

Flow example (Telegram → node):

- Telegram message arrives at the **Gateway**.
- Gateway runs the **agent** and decides whether to call a node tool.
- Gateway calls the **node** over the Gateway WebSocket (`node.*` RPC).
- Node returns the result; Gateway replies back out to Telegram.

Notes:

- **Nodes do not run the gateway service.** Only one gateway should run per host unless you intentionally run isolated profiles (see [Multiple gateways](/gateway/multiple-gateways)).
- macOS app “node mode” is just a node client over the Gateway WebSocket.

## SSH tunnel (CLI + tools)

Create a local tunnel to the remote Gateway WS:

```bash
ssh -N -L 18789:127.0.0.1:18789 user@host
```

With the tunnel up:

- `openclaw health` and `openclaw status --deep` now reach the remote gateway via `ws://127.0.0.1:18789`.
- `openclaw gateway {status,health,send,agent,call}` can also target the forwarded URL via `--url` when needed.

Note: replace `18789` with your configured `gateway.port` (or `--port`/`OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_PORT`).

## CLI remote defaults

You can persist a remote target so CLI commands use it by default:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    mode: "remote",
    remote: {
      url: "ws://127.0.0.1:18789",
      token: "your-token",
    },
  },
}
```

When the gateway is loopback-only, keep the URL at `ws://127.0.0.1:18789` and open the SSH tunnel first.

## Chat UI over SSH

WebChat no longer uses a separate HTTP port. The SwiftUI chat UI connects directly to the Gateway WebSocket.

- Forward `18789` over SSH (see above), then connect clients to `ws://127.0.0.1:18789`.
- On macOS, prefer the app’s “Remote over SSH” mode, which manages the tunnel automatically.

## macOS app “Remote over SSH”

The macOS menu bar app can drive the same setup end-to-end (remote status checks, WebChat, and Voice Wake forwarding).

Runbook: [macOS remote access](/platforms/mac/remote).

## Security rules (remote/VPN)

Short version: **keep the Gateway loopback-only** unless you’re sure you need a bind.

- **Loopback + SSH/Tailscale Serve** is the safest default (no public exposure).
- **Non-loopback binds** (`lan`/`tailnet`/`custom`, or `auto` when loopback is unavailable) must use auth tokens/passwords.
- `gateway.remote.token` is **only** for remote CLI calls — it does **not** enable local auth.
- `gateway.remote.tlsFingerprint` pins the remote TLS cert when using `wss://`.
- **Tailscale Serve** can authenticate via identity headers when `gateway.auth.allowTailscale: true`.
  Set it to `false` if you want tokens/passwords instead.
- Treat browser control like operator access: tailnet-only + deliberate node pairing.

Deep dive: [Security](/gateway/security).

Commit message:

Security: Prevent gateway credential exfiltration via URL override (#9179)
* Gateway: require explicit auth for url overrides

* Gateway: scope credential blocking to non-local URLs only

Address review feedback: the previous fix blocked credential fallback for
ALL URL overrides, which was overly strict and could break workflows that
use --url to switch between loopback/tailnet without passing credentials.

Now credential fallback is only blocked for non-local URLs (public IPs,
external hostnames). Local addresses (127.0.0.1, localhost, private IPs
like 192.168.x.x, 10.x.x.x, tailnet 100.x.x.x) still get credential
fallback as before.

This maintains the security fix (preventing credential exfiltration to
attacker-controlled URLs) while preserving backward compatibility for
legitimate local URL overrides.

* Security: require explicit credentials for gateway url overrides (#8113) (thanks @victormier)

* Gateway: reuse explicit auth helper for url overrides (#8113) (thanks @victormier)

* Tests: format gateway chat test (#8113) (thanks @victormier)

* Tests: require explicit auth for gateway url overrides (#8113) (thanks @victormier)

---------

Co-authored-by: Victor Mier <victormier@gmail.com>

docs/gateway/remote.md, after:

---
summary: "Remote access using SSH tunnels (Gateway WS) and tailnets"
read_when:
  - Running or troubleshooting remote gateway setups
title: "Remote Access"
---

# Remote access (SSH, tunnels, and tailnets)

This repo supports “remote over SSH” by keeping a single Gateway (the master) running on a dedicated host (desktop/server) and connecting clients to it.

- For **operators (you / the macOS app)**: SSH tunneling is the universal fallback.
- For **nodes (iOS/Android and future devices)**: connect to the Gateway **WebSocket** (LAN/tailnet or SSH tunnel as needed).

## The core idea

- The Gateway WebSocket binds to **loopback** on your configured port (defaults to 18789).
- For remote use, you forward that loopback port over SSH (or use a tailnet/VPN and tunnel less).

## Common VPN/tailnet setups (where the agent lives)

Think of the **Gateway host** as “where the agent lives.” It owns sessions, auth profiles, channels, and state.
Your laptop/desktop (and nodes) connect to that host.

### 1) Always-on Gateway in your tailnet (VPS or home server)

Run the Gateway on a persistent host and reach it via **Tailscale** or SSH.

- **Best UX:** keep `gateway.bind: "loopback"` and use **Tailscale Serve** for the Control UI.
- **Fallback:** keep loopback + SSH tunnel from any machine that needs access.
- **Examples:** [exe.dev](/platforms/exe-dev) (easy VM) or [Hetzner](/platforms/hetzner) (production VPS).

This is ideal when your laptop sleeps often but you want the agent always-on.

### 2) Home desktop runs the Gateway, laptop is remote control

The laptop does **not** run the agent. It connects remotely:

- Use the macOS app’s **Remote over SSH** mode (Settings → General → “OpenClaw runs”).
- The app opens and manages the tunnel, so WebChat + health checks “just work.”

Runbook: [macOS remote access](/platforms/mac/remote).

### 3) Laptop runs the Gateway, remote access from other machines

Keep the Gateway local but expose it safely:

- SSH tunnel to the laptop from other machines, or
- Tailscale Serve the Control UI and keep the Gateway loopback-only.

Guide: [Tailscale](/gateway/tailscale) and [Web overview](/web).

## Command flow (what runs where)

One gateway service owns state + channels. Nodes are peripherals.

Flow example (Telegram → node):

- Telegram message arrives at the **Gateway**.
- Gateway runs the **agent** and decides whether to call a node tool.
- Gateway calls the **node** over the Gateway WebSocket (`node.*` RPC).
- Node returns the result; Gateway replies back out to Telegram.

Notes:

- **Nodes do not run the gateway service.** Only one gateway should run per host unless you intentionally run isolated profiles (see [Multiple gateways](/gateway/multiple-gateways)).
- macOS app “node mode” is just a node client over the Gateway WebSocket.

## SSH tunnel (CLI + tools)

Create a local tunnel to the remote Gateway WS:

```bash
ssh -N -L 18789:127.0.0.1:18789 user@host
```

With the tunnel up:

- `openclaw health` and `openclaw status --deep` now reach the remote gateway via `ws://127.0.0.1:18789`.
- `openclaw gateway {status,health,send,agent,call}` can also target the forwarded URL via `--url` when needed.

Note: replace `18789` with your configured `gateway.port` (or `--port`/`OPENCLAW_GATEWAY_PORT`).
Note: when you pass `--url`, the CLI does not fall back to config or environment credentials.
Include `--token` or `--password` explicitly. Missing explicit credentials is an error.

## CLI remote defaults

You can persist a remote target so CLI commands use it by default:

```json5
{
  gateway: {
    mode: "remote",
    remote: {
      url: "ws://127.0.0.1:18789",
      token: "your-token",
    },
  },
}
```

When the gateway is loopback-only, keep the URL at `ws://127.0.0.1:18789` and open the SSH tunnel first.

## Chat UI over SSH

WebChat no longer uses a separate HTTP port. The SwiftUI chat UI connects directly to the Gateway WebSocket.

- Forward `18789` over SSH (see above), then connect clients to `ws://127.0.0.1:18789`.
- On macOS, prefer the app’s “Remote over SSH” mode, which manages the tunnel automatically.

## macOS app “Remote over SSH”

The macOS menu bar app can drive the same setup end-to-end (remote status checks, WebChat, and Voice Wake forwarding).

Runbook: [macOS remote access](/platforms/mac/remote).

## Security rules (remote/VPN)

Short version: **keep the Gateway loopback-only** unless you’re sure you need a bind.

- **Loopback + SSH/Tailscale Serve** is the safest default (no public exposure).
- **Non-loopback binds** (`lan`/`tailnet`/`custom`, or `auto` when loopback is unavailable) must use auth tokens/passwords.
- `gateway.remote.token` is **only** for remote CLI calls — it does **not** enable local auth.
- `gateway.remote.tlsFingerprint` pins the remote TLS cert when using `wss://`.
- **Tailscale Serve** can authenticate via identity headers when `gateway.auth.allowTailscale: true`.
  Set it to `false` if you want tokens/passwords instead.
- Treat browser control like operator access: tailnet-only + deliberate node pairing.

Deep dive: [Security](/gateway/security).
